---
title: Complexity lexicon
---

-   [Context](#context)
-   [Complexity](#complexity)
-   [Non-linearity & multiple outcomes](#non-linearity--multiple-outcomes)
-   [Sensitivity to initial conditions](#sensitivity-to-initial-conditions)
-   [Innovation as exploration of the space of possibilities](#innovation-as-exploration-of-the-space-of-possibilities)
-   [Far-from-equilibrium](#far-from-equilibrium)
-   [Self-organisation](#self-organisation)
-   [Dissipative structures](#dissipative-structures)


# Context

The following terms refer to the work done over the past three decades
by scientists in the fields of physics, chemistry, biology, economics
and mathematics. Many of these scientists are associated with the Santa
Fe Institute in New Mexico, but also include scientists based in Europe,
such as Prigogine, Sengers, Nicolis, Allen and Goodwin. There is no one
theory of complexity, but many such theories arising from the various
sciences studying complex adaptive systems (CAS).

As many of these concepts are borrowed from the natural sciences, their
use within an organisational and management context, can lead to
misapplication and misunderstanding. The research project will attempt
to clarify the concepts and principles which are common to all complex
systems and to explore their application to organisations. A series of
seminars on Strategy & Complexity and a Study Group on Organisational
Complexity, will be held at the LSE and will endeavour to stimulate the
dialogue between academics from a variety of disciplines and business
executives, through the discussion of work in progress as well as the
application of the principles of complexity in organisations.


# Complexity

There are many definitions of complexity and all are context-dependent.
For the purposes of this proposal, complexity is defined as
organisational complexity and is associated with the intricate
inter-relationships of individuals, of individuals with artefacts (such
as IT), and with the effects of inter-actions within the organisation
and between organisations and their 'environment' which includes related
businesses. Complexity arises through connectivity and the
inter-relationships of a system's constituent elements. The way these
inter-relations arise, the way they help maintain and create new
patterns and structures which enable an organisation to evolve, is not
well understood. Complexity in this context is also associated with the
characteristics of non-linearity\*, self-organisation\*, emergent
properties\*, far-from-equilibrium\* operation and sensitivity to
initial conditions\*.

Complex evolving systems (CES) refers to those systems which are able to
learn and which change their internal structure and organisation over
time, thus changing the behaviour of individual elements. The term
complex adaptive systems is used by the Santa Fe scientists to describe
complex systems which adapt through a process of self-organisation\* and
selection. However, physical, chemical and biological systems are not
conscious and do not 'learn' in the sense that humans learn. Hence the
term complex evolving system \[Allen, 1996\] is used in this proposal to
distinguish human from other complex systems. Both CAS and CES are
subject to change through mutation or totally unexpected change, which
is then subject to adaptation. Characteristics of complex systems: The
study of natural complex systems has shown that all complex systems
share certain generic characteristics. Some of these characteristics are
included in this terminology and the research project will explore their
application to social systems. Such application, however, questions long
held assumptions and has profound implications for management, methods
of work, the shape of organisations, and the development and use of
information technology.


# Non-linearity & multiple outcomes

Modelling of aggregate behaviour in organisations is usually based on
the assumption that all individuals exhibit average and thus predictable
behaviour, when organisations are entities made up of individuals who
interact, are mutually inter-dependent and exhibit non-average
behaviour. Through multiple inter-actions, organisations are capable of
many possible responses; that is, they are complex, unpredictable,
non-linear systems, producing multiple outcomes. Yet they are studied as
if they were simple, linear systems guaranteed to produce a single,
predictable outcome. Another aspect which is often ignored, is that any
outcome is influenced by a number of contributing factors. These factor
cannot all be taken into account for various reasons; they may not be
known, may not be quantifiable or they may be ignored as relatively
insignificant, yet these factors may be subject to the phenomenon known
as sensitivity to initial conditions\*, which could lead to unforeseen
and often undesirable consequences.


# Sensitivity to initial conditions

When a small change in the initial conditions produces major and
unpredictable qualitative changes. Traditional approaches implicitly
assume that events occur at an average rate (there are exceptions, and
Robust Planning for example does not make that assumption) and that they
can be adjusted if they deviate from the desired plan by employing the
appropriate adjustment mechanism. But events do not unfold with average
regularity and adjustments rarely produce the desired effect. No
planning mechanism can take all initial and influencing conditions into
account, and at times a small change in the initial conditions produces
major and unpredictable qualitative changes. This coupled with positive
feedback or increasing returns \[Arthur 1990, 1995\], makes accurate
forecasting and the planning of specific outcomes extremely difficult.


# Innovation as exploration of the space of possibilities

Traditional approaches also ignore an organisation's capacity to learn
and change and to maintain diverse and varied strategies, assuming that
a single 'optimum' strategy is both possible and desirable. The sciences
of complexity have shown that for an entity such an organisation to
survive and thrive it needs to explore its space of possibilities and to
encourage variety. When markets were stable and growth was a constant,
single optimum strategies based on extrapolation from historical data,
were thought to be feasible. But unstable environments and rapidly
changing markets require flexible approaches based on variety. \[Ashby,
1956\]


# Far-from-equilibrium

Economic models often assume that a state of equilibrium is a desirable
condition, but the sciences of complexity show that systems which
survive and thrive, do so when they are pushed away from equilibrium,
while if they remain at equilibrium they die. When far-from-equilibrium,
systems are forced to experiment and explore their space of
possibilities and this exploration helps them discover and create new
patterns of relationships, different structures and innovative ways of
working. \[Prigogine, Nicolis\] Non-linear dynamics (or chaos theory)
may be used to explain the emergence of these new patterns as analogous
to the transition phase of bounded instability, between stability and
instability which is a state of creativity and innovation. \[Gleick
1990, Parker & Stacey 1994\] Although non-linear dynamics is an integral
part of the theories of complexity it is only one aspect and needs to be
balanced by the broader realm of understanding offered by complexity.
Analogies based on the 'edge of chaos' need to be made applicable to
social systems and organisations. One key question which will be
addressed in both phases of the research project is the balance between
stability and instability necessary to encourage innovation while
avoiding both instability and stagnation. At the transition state
between stability and instability, order and organisation may arise
spontaneously out of disorder through a process of "self-organisation".


# Self-organisation

The spontaneous organisation of the system's elements into coherent new
patterns, structures and behaviours. Change in human organisations may
be brought about by the spontaneous self-organisation of individuals.
These new patterns are not decreed, designed or imposed by any specific
individual. They simply happen. They may subsequently dissolve and leave
little trace or they may have a longer lasting effect and change the
structure of the organisation. In the latter case true evolution has
taken place and the internal structure of the organisation has changed.
We need to understand how to encourage self-organisation as a means of
creating new innovative patterns of behaviour as well as a means of
devolving the strategy process throughout the organisation. If the
organisation of the future is to work on a different basis, that pattern
or shape will need to emerge and evolve from a given set of simple
principles. \[Allen, Bovaird, Goodwin, Holland, Kauffman, Lane, Nicolis,
Varela\]


# Dissipative structures

Dissipative structures (Prigogine & Stengers 1985) are open
systems exchanging energy, matter or information with their environment.
In Prigoginian terms, all systems contain subsystems which are
continually "fluctuating". When one or more fluctuations become so
powerful, as a result of positive feedback, that they shatter the
pre-existing organisation, the system has been forced into a
far-from-equilibrium condition and has reached a point of bifurcation.
It is inherently impossible to determine in advance which direction
change will take. The system may disintegrate into instability or leap
to a new level of order or organisation called a "dissipative
structure". It is given that name because it requires more energy (or
information) to sustain it than the simpler structure it replaced. In
terms of the flow of information, a stable system can be sustained with
a sluggish flow, but a much more vigorous and richer flow is necessary
for a system operating far-from-equilibrium. If the flow of information
becomes too fast, however, then the system may disintegrate.
